Add draft of unionRunRunInPlace blog post (#293)
pilosa/www: content/blog/marginal-performance-improvements.md

The first attempt was the naive one:

- Join the two slices of intervals into one.
- Sort the joined slice.
- Iterate through intervals in joined slices and merge overlapping or adjacent intervals.

This resulted in simple, understandable code, which accomplished the goal of avoiding the container type conversion. Adding a sorting step felt like the wrong approach; surely we can avoid all that additional time and memory usage. If nothing else, it became a useful baseline for benchmarking.

The next attempt looked great in terms of performance. The idea was to iterate over the runs in both containers in parallel, selecting two near-by runs, and then handling each possible case of overlap in a separate branch, updating the values in the first container along the way.

Unfortunately, it was **so** high-performance that it was nearly unreadable. It sat in limbo for a week while we fought over the responsibility of reviewing it (one reviewer remarking "I'm not sure if I should be excited or scared by the use of the `goto`"). I'm in favor of commenting code, but when understanding code crucially depends on dense comments, it may be a sign of fragility, and future maintenance problems.

> Fortunately, [Kuba]() stepped in with a much-improved third iteration. In the interest of keeping this post relatively short, we'll just outline the approach here. Rather than iterating over *intervals*, iteration is done over *values*, while tracking a state variable indicating whether the current value is inside any interval or not. The shift to a state-based solution simplifies the code, in part by consolidating some logic into a state-update function. The inner loop again requires several branches for different interval-overlap cases, but now each branch calls the state-update function with minor differences. The resulting code is quite a bit more readable.

Author: link to twitter/blog post?

Reviewer: I don't have any of them, but maybe `github.com/kuba--`

	  // evaluate_state  - if we are clear then we start a new interval, so value.start = b_pnt, 
      // update current state by information about b_pnt (start or end)
      // if state is clear after update it means we just got out of interval, so value.end = b_pnt 
	  evaluate_state(b_pnt)

      // move to the point
      b_pnt++
  }
  } ELSE IF NOT empty(a) {
      evaluate_state(a_pnt)
      a_pnt++
  } ELSE IF NOT empty(b) {
      evaluate_state(b_pnt)
      b_pnt++
  } ELSE {
    BREAK LOOP
  }

  IF state IS clear {
    IF from_b(value) {
       // if value comes from b, we need to extend a, first.
       copy(a[a_off+1:], a[a_off:])
    }

    // append_interval appends or sets value in a at a_off position
    append_interval(a, value, a_off)

    // count number of bits
    n += value.end - value.start + 1
  }

  IF a_pnt is end point {
    a++ // move to the next interval
    a_pnt = a.start // set a_pnt as starting point of next interval
  }

  IF b_pnt is end point {
     b++ // move to the next interval
     b_pnt = b.start // set b_pnt as starting point of next interval
  }
}

// tailor a
IF len(a) > 0 {
   a = a[:a_off]
}

```

## The Results

> Below is a chart comparing performance before and after adding `unionRunRunInPlace`. Each test case is described with a schematic representation of a bitmap: ■□□□□□□□ represents a bitmap with only the first bit set. The fourth case, a union of "all even bits" with "all odd bits", demonstrates the worst case. This is truly pathological: not only does this kind of pattern almost never happen in practice, but the specific bit pattern of "**all** even bits" is not logically possible in Roaring Bitmaps; the bitmap would be converted to a different, more efficient container type. In practice, we find that *run containers* often contain a small number of runs, so we expect the first three of these cases to be representative of real-world behavior.

Author: this schematic thing is kind of goofy, but i think it looks good in the chart

+++
date = "2020-07-13"
publishdate = "2020-07-13"
title = "The effort behind marginal performance improvements"

> author = "Kuba Podgorski and Alan Bernstein"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author = "Kuba Podgórski and Alan Bernstein"
```

- Array: a list of integers indicating set bit positions.
- Bitmap: a direct binary representation of the bitmap.
- Run: a list of intervals, each indicating a contiguous "run" of set bits.

For each bitmap, its container type is chosen to minimize storage space, which keeps memory use low. Queries on the data are defined in terms of basic logical operations on pairs of bitmaps. Time-optimized operations are implemented for each pair of container types, which precludes the need for converting back and forth between container types (a drain on both memory and time). 

What we gain in query performance, we lose in added code complexity. This complexity is explained in a previous [blog post](/blog/adding-rle-support/), where we detail how four logical operations, each supporting three container types for both operands, require 27 implementation functions.

Now, I'd like to describe another dimension of complexity: in-place operations.

## The Problem

> While this proliferation of type-specific implementations does wonders for speed, it can be suboptimal in terms of memory allocation. In an illustrative example, we might execute a union across two existing rows in a pilosa index, to produce a useful result, in a newly allocated container. In the case that one of the operands can be discarded, there is an opportunity to reduce memory usage by re-using that operand's container: an [in-place](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) operation. Of course, this is not always possible, and very often it is much simpler to convert one container to a different type, to make use of an existing implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While this proliferation of type-specific implementations does wonders for speed, it can be suboptimal in terms of memory allocation. In an illustrative example, we might execute a union across the containers of two existing rows in a Pilosa index. In this case, it's not uncommon for the union of two containers to result in yet another, newly allocated container. But, in the case that one of the operands can be discarded, there is an opportunity to reduce memory usage by re-using that operand's container: an [in-place](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In-place_algorithm) operation.
```

I'm not sure if this suggestion is good either, but this paragraph wasn't especially clear to me.

The first attempt was the naive one:

- Join the two slices of intervals into one.
- Sort the joined slice.
- Iterate through intervals in joined slices and merge overlapping or adjacent intervals.

This resulted in simple, understandable code, which accomplished the goal of avoiding the container type conversion. Adding a sorting step felt like the wrong approach; surely we can avoid all that additional time and memory usage. If nothing else, it became a useful baseline for benchmarking.

The next attempt looked great in terms of performance. The idea was to iterate over the runs in both containers in parallel, selecting two near-by runs, and then handling each possible case of overlap in a separate branch, updating the values in the first container along the way.

Unfortunately, it was **so** high-performance that it was nearly unreadable. It sat in limbo for a week while we fought over the responsibility of reviewing it (one reviewer remarking "I'm not sure if I should be excited or scared by the use of the `goto`"). I'm in favor of commenting code, but when understanding code crucially depends on dense comments, it may be a sign of fragility, and future maintenance problems.

> Fortunately, [Kuba](https://github.com/kuba--) stepped in with a much-improved third iteration. In the interest of keeping this post relatively short, we'll just outline the approach here. Rather than iterating over *intervals*, iteration is done over *values*, while tracking a state variable indicating whether the current value is inside any interval or not. The shift to a state-based solution simplifies the code, in part by consolidating some logic into a state-update function. The inner loop again requires several branches for different interval-overlap cases, but now each branch calls the state-update function with minor differences. The resulting code is quite a bit more readable. [See for yourself](https://github.com/pilosa/pilosa/pull/2119/files)!

Reviewer: It has been merged, so we can replace PR link by:
https://github.com/pilosa/pilosa/blob/55353a256773172284ed58b01c5e3ef49c4b4323/roaring/roaring.go#L3943

> Fortunately, [Kuba](https://github.com/kuba--) stepped in with a much-improved third iteration. In the interest of keeping this post relatively short, we'll just outline the approach here. Rather than iterating over *intervals*, iteration is done over *values*, while tracking a state variable indicating whether the current value is inside any interval or not. The shift to a state-based solution simplifies the code, in part by consolidating some logic into a state-update function. The inner loop again requires several branches for different interval-overlap cases, but now each branch calls the state-update function with minor differences. The resulting code is quite a bit more readable. [See for yourself](https://github.com/pilosa/pilosa/pull/2119/files)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, [Kuba](https://github.com/kuba--) stepped in with a much-improved third iteration. In the interest of keeping this post relatively short, we'll just outline the approach here. Rather than iterating over *intervals*, iteration is done over *values*, while tracking a state variable indicating whether the current value is inside any interval or not. The shift to a state-based solution simplifies the code, in part by consolidating some logic into a state-update function. The inner loop again requires several branches for different interval-overlap cases, but now each branch calls the state-update function with minor differences. The resulting code is quite a bit more readable. [See for yourself](https://github.com/pilosa/pilosa/blob/55353a256773172284ed58b01c5e3ef49c4b4323/roaring/roaring.go#L3943)!
```

## The Results

Below is a chart comparing performance before and after adding `unionRunRunInPlace`. Each test case is described with a schematic representation of a bitmap: ■□□□□□□□ represents a bitmap with only the first bit set. The fourth case, a union of "all even bits" with "all odd bits", demonstrates the worst case. This is truly pathological: not only does this kind of pattern almost never happen in practice, but the specific bit pattern of "**all** even bits" is not logically possible in Roaring Bitmaps; the bitmap would be converted to a different, more efficient container type. In practice, we find that *run containers* often contain a small number of runs, so we expect the first three of these cases to be representative of real-world behavior.

![Performance Improvement](/img/blog/marginal-performance-improvements/performance-chart.png)
*Performance Improvement*

> In short, the performance improvement was fantastic: an order of magnitude faster, and two orders of magnitude less memory usage. This doesn't look ike a "marginal improvement," you might say. That's true, for this case in itself. As just one of five union-in-place functions, and one of 23 in-place functions, the overall effect on general query performance is tempered somewhat. Still, we're proud of the progress.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In short, the performance improvement was fantastic: an order of magnitude faster, and two orders of magnitude less memory usage. This doesn't look like a "marginal improvement," you might say. That's true, for this case in itself. As just one of five union-in-place functions, and one of 23 in-place functions, the overall effect on general query performance is tempered somewhat. Still, we're proud of the progress.
```
